docs(troubleshooting): diagnose defective disk MTA-1566 (#198)
scaleway/docs-content: dedibox/hardware/troubleshooting/diagnose-defective-disk.mdx

---
title: Diagnosis of a failing disk
description: This page explains how to diagnose a failing disk
dates:
  validation: 2021-11-02
  posted: 2021-11-02
---

[Smartmontools](https://www.smartmontools.org/) is a set of tools that controls and monitors a disk using the **SMART** standard (Self-Monitoring, Analysis, and Reporting Technology System).

It consists of two parts:

> * `smartd`, a daemon allows you to periodically check your hard drives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `smartd`, a daemon that allows you to periodically check your hard drives
```

* `smartctl`, a command line tool to view the status of the hard disk

The tool supports the vast majority of modern hard drives.

<Message type="requirement">

  - You have an account and are logged into the [Dedibox Console](https://console.online.net) 
  - You have a Dedibox dedicated server 

</Message>

## How to check a single-disk server

1. Log into your server using SSH.

> 2. Run the following command from the root account (or preceding it with `sudo`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Run the following command from the root account (or precede it with `sudo`):
```

        smartctl -s on -a -d megaraid,${i} ${DEVICE} -T permissive
    done
    ```
## How to check a HP multi-disk server

1. Log into your server using SSH.

2. Run the following command to display the status of the RAID:
    ```
    ssacli ctrl all show config
    ```
    An output similar to the following example displays:
    ```
    Smart Array P410 in Slot 1                (sn: PACCRID111003N3)

    array A (SATA, Unused Space: 0 MB)

        logicaldrive 1 (1.8 TB, RAID 1, OK)

        physicaldrive 1I:1:1 (port 1I:box 1:bay 1, SATA, 2 TB, OK)
        physicaldrive 1I:1:2 (port 1I:box 1:bay 2, SATA, 2 TB, OK)
    ```

3. Run the following command to display the SMART values of the disks:
    ```
    smartctl -a -d cciss,0 /dev/sg0
    ```
    then run:
    ```
    smartctl -a -d cciss,1 /dev/sg0
    ```

## How to use SMARTD to monitor your disks

`smartd` allows you to monitor your disks and to be alerted (depending on the configuration) by email in case of failure.

<Message type="important">

There is no guarantee as to the result of SMARTD and the time remaining before the disk fails completely. 

> However, we strongly encourage you to backup and request a replacement rapidly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we strongly encourage you to back up and request a replacement rapidly.
```

        ```
    * Then add a line similar to the following example:

        ```
        /dev/sda -a -d sat -o on -S on -s (S/../.././01|L/../1/03) -m root -M exec /usr/share/smartmontools/smartd-runner
        ```

    The above example will allow you to test your hard disk as follows:

    * A short test (S) every day at 1am (01)
    * A long test (L), every Monday (1) at 3am (03)

5. Activate the daemon by uncommenting the line `start_smartd=yes` in the file `/etc/default/smartmontools`.

6. Start the daemon by running the following command: 
    ```
    service smartmontools start
    ```

If a problem is detected, it will send a default mail to root (-m root). 
You can redirect the mails sent to the `root` user to your personal mailbox or to send this mail directly to another address.

### How to run tests manually 

To run SMART tests manually, use the following commands:

* `smartctl -t short /dev/sda` to run a **short** test on your disk
* `smartctl -t long /dev/sda` to run a **long** test on your disk

Once the tests are completed, you can check the results with the following command:

```
smartctl -l selftest /dev/sda
```

## How to report disk failures

> If you notice any errors when running a SMART diagnosis on your disk, open a [support ticket](/console/my-account/how-to/open-a-support-ticket/) and ask for the replacement of the disk, indicating the serial number with the result of the `smartctl` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you notice any errors when running a SMART diagnosis on your disk, open a [support ticket](/console/my-account/how-to/open-a-support-ticket/) and ask for the disk to be replaced, indicating the serial number with the result of the `smartctl` command:
```

        smartctl -s on -a -d megaraid,${i} ${DEVICE} -T permissive
    done
    ```
## How to check a HP multi-disk server

1. Log into your server using SSH.

2. Run the following command to display the status of the RAID:
    ```
    ssacli ctrl all show config
    ```
    An output similar to the following example displays:
    ```
    Smart Array P410 in Slot 1                (sn: PACCRID111003N3)

    array A (SATA, Unused Space: 0 MB)

        logicaldrive 1 (1.8 TB, RAID 1, OK)

        physicaldrive 1I:1:1 (port 1I:box 1:bay 1, SATA, 2 TB, OK)
        physicaldrive 1I:1:2 (port 1I:box 1:bay 2, SATA, 2 TB, OK)
    ```

3. Run the following commands to display the SMART values of the disks:
    ```
    smartctl -a -d cciss,0 /dev/sg0
    ```
    then run:
    ```
    smartctl -a -d cciss,1 /dev/sg0
    ```

## How to use SMARTD to monitor your disks

`smartd` allows you to monitor your disks and to be alerted (depending on the configuration) by email in case of failure.

<Message type="important">

There is no guarantee as to the result of SMARTD and the time remaining before the disk fails completely. 

> However, there is a good chance that you will have time to make a backup and request a replacement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, we strongly encourage you to backup and request a replacement rapidly.
```

</Message>

### How to configure SMARTD

Below, you find an example of a single-disk server installed on a Debian-like machine.

<Message type="note">

The following commands are to be executed as `root` or via `sudo`.

</Message>

1. Log into your server using SSH.

2. Enable basic SMART options:
    ```
    smartctl -s on -o on -S on /dev/sda
    ```

> 3. Verify, that disk has no problem:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Check that the disk is healthy:
```

    ```
    smartctl -H /dev/sda
    ```

4. Edit the file `/etc/smartd.conf`, to set up automated tests:

    * Start by commenting out the following line:
        ```
        DEVICESCAN -d removable -n standby -m root -M exec /usr/share/smartmontools/smartd-runner
        ```
    * Then add a line similar to the following example:

        ```
        /dev/sda -a -d sat -o on -S on -s (S/../.././01|L/../1/03) -m root -M exec /usr/share/smartmontools/smartd-runner
        ```

    The above example will allow you to test your hard disk as follows:

    * A short test (S) every day at 1am (01)
    * A long test (L), every Monday (1) at 3am (03)

> 4. Activate the daemon by uncommenting the line `start_smartd=yes` in the file `/etc/default/smartmontools`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Activate the daemon by uncommenting the line `start_smartd=yes` in the file `/etc/default/smartmontools`.
```

> 5. Start the daemon by running the following command: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Start the daemon by running the following command: 
```

    ```
    service smartmontools start
    ```

If a problem is detected, it will send a default mail to root (-m root). 
You can redirect the mails sent to the `root` user to your personal mailbox or to send this mail directly to another address.

### How to run tests manually 

To run SMART tests manually, use the following commands:

* `smartctl -t short /dev/sda` to run a **short** test on your disk
* `smartctl -t long /dev/sda` to run a **long** test on your disk

Once the tests are completed, you can check the results with the following command:

```
smartctl -l selftest /dev/sda
```

## How to report disk failures

> If you notice any errors when running a SMART diagonsis on your disk, open a [support ticket](/console/my-account/how-to/open-a-support-ticket/) and ask for the replacement of the disk by indicating the serial number with the result of the smartctl command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you notice any errors when running a SMART diagnosis on your disk, open a [support ticket](/console/my-account/how-to/open-a-support-ticket/) and ask for the replacement of the disk, indicating the serial number with the result of the `smartctl` command:
```
